Being a new data science company, we at CraftData Labs often have much smaller budgets to work with on our projects than big established companies. As a result, we have learned to make the most of the resources without incurring huge server costs. Even with the proliferation of distributed data processing, we cannot forget that with multi-core processors we can run many tasks in parallel within a single computer itself.This article is the first in a series called Parallel Programming Primer where we will share some of our hard earned experiences parallelizing our data processing tasks in hopes that it will help others who encounter similar situations. In this first part we introduce the basic concepts of parallel computing and the parallel programming model. This should nicely lay the foundation for the rest of the series and provides the necessary background to understand them.It’s no secret that computer processors aren’t getting much faster anymore and the age of multi-core processors has been upon us for a good part of the last decade. From the largest supercomputers to the tiniest embedded devices these multi-core processors are everywhere. This has caused a paradigm shift from the traditional sequential way in which programmes were written. Most new programming language these days will have a fairly sophisticated concurrency model built-in to take advantage of all the cores available, while more established languages are also introducing new features to keep up with this trend. We first look at the type of hardware available these days that allow parallel programming.There are different types of parallel hardware available in the market as the trend for more and more cores continues, ranging from general to highly specialised ones. We explore some of the most important ones here.Multi-core processors are the most common processor we encounter that are found in servers, desktops, and mobile devices. They usually contain 2 to 8 independent processing units called cores on the same chip. Processors with more than 8 cores are also available and they are usually referred to as Many-core processors and are used in embedded and High Performance Computing (HPC) systems.Symmetric multiprocessors (SMP) have multiple identical processors grouped in powers of 2, that share the main memory and connect to it by an I/O bus, thus acting as a single processor. These multiple execution groups are not on the same chip but each one itself can contain multi-core processors.


